docs: vacuum-module-instruction-manual (#21157)
OpenTrons/opentrons-api: docs/vacuum/docs/collars-spacers.md

---
title: "Vacuum Module: Collars and Spacers"
description: "General use and specifications for Vacuum Module collars and spacers."
---

> The Vacuum Module uses combinations of interchangeable collars and spacers to control labware stacking and spacing in automated, sold-phase (SPE) extraction protocols. This hardware holds filtration labware, ensures a vacuum seal, and helps route liquid correctly, whether is being saved as an eluate or discarded as waste.

Reviewer: **solid-phase 

I think we should use `vacuum filtration protocols` instead of SPE protocols. my understanding is that SPE protocols are one *type* of workflows that can be used with the module. 

For example in my one-sheeter I listed `automated workflows for protein and peptide sample cleanup, vacuum-based solid phase or nucleic acid extraction, and automated waste handling. `

and, maybe should say `to control labware stacking and filtration`; I do like the spacing though... maybe a sentence to establish why the spacing is important (or maybe that comes later)

Author: Great, thank you! I am going to change this to match the one-sheeter.

## Collars

> Collars sit directly on the manifold base to support filter plates during vacuum extraction protocols. Each collar features an integrated gasket that forms an airtight vacuum seal with the well plate, while a secondary gasket on the manifold base seals it to the collar. All collars are fully compatible with the Flex Gripper for automated protocol operations.

Reviewer: I think it's important to have a section about how things stack, even if its just text and your idea about the exploded view comes later. 

I found myself reading this first sentence and thinking "what's the manifold base?" even though I technically saw an image of it in the previous page.

Author: Hmmmm, I'm now thinking there needs to be a section for the base or a separate page.

Author: Adding new section. Now this is "Vacuum Base, Collars, and Spacers." File name changes to `base-collars-spacers.md`.

> The Vacuum Module ships with two collar sizes:

Reviewer: "includes" instead of "ships"? 

maybe a better question is what falls under the "vacuum module" category? is it everything you receive when you pay for the vacuum module, or do we consider it to be all the components together? 

in the one-sheeter I listed them all as included components.

Author: Will change to "includes"

* **Short Collar (42 mm):** Accommodates standard microliter (μL) filter plates.
* **Tall Collar (72 mm):** Accommodates deep-well filter plates (typically up to 2 mL).

<figure class="side-by-side" markdown>
![Short collar](images/collar-short.png)
![Tall collar](images/collar-tall.png)
<figcaption>Short collar (42 mm) and tall collar (72 mm)</figcaption>
</figure>

## Spacers

> Spacers sit inside the manifold base to elevate and support the internal collection labware.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Spacers sit inside the manifold base and hold the internal collection labware at the correct height for filtration.
```

? "elevate" just rang a little strange to me

Author: Yeah, this felt wrong to me when writing it. Almost like a commercial for something that's mundane but trying to code as expensive (e.g., "Nu-hydration. It's water...elevated.") seems kinda fake. I'll fix it.

> The primary purpose of a spacer is to minimize the vertical clearance between the source filter plate and the destination collection plate. A small plate gap helps ensure fluid droplets drop cleanly and directly into the receiving wells, preventing high-velocity vacuum streams from diverting droplets sideways and causing cross-contamination.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The primary purpose of a spacer is to minimize the vertical clearance between the source filter plate and the destination collection plate. A small plate gap helps ensure fluid droplets drop cleanly and directly into the receiving wells, preventing cross-contamination.
```

The Vacuum Module ships with two spacer sizes to match varying labware profiles:

* **Short Spacer:** 27 mm
* **Tall Spacer:** 34 mm

<figure class="side-by-side" markdown>
![Short spacer](images/spacer-short3.svg)
![Tall spacer](images/spacer-tall3.svg)
<figcaption>Short spacer (27 mm) and tall spacer (34 mm)</figcaption>
</figure>

## Typical Use

> ### Elution and Filtrate Collection

Reviewer: ope OK; found the section I referred to in the comment above.

One question I have... are the collars and spacers fully compatible? Can you use the short with the tall, etc.? which are used for each of the configurations below? 

I know the direct filter to waste configuration states that no spacer is needed, but which collar? can you use either collar? A collar is always required, right?

Author: According to Nick, these are all interchangeable, tall and short collars and spacers.

Author: Adding more text at the beginning to indicate compatibility and interchangeability.
